Let's talk about advanced react. These were things that like
You don't really need to use these so so much maybe uncontrolled forms
You'll use these quite a bit but error boundaries and portals much more niche in their use cases, but still felt
Useful enough that I wanted you have them in your tool bag even if you don't pull them out very much, right?
So let's talk about
Portals we have this is just the the markup for the page, right?
We have root right here
And that's the only thing that our app can render into let's say we had 30, you know 10 different divs here
Our app currently is only constrained to its root, which is this root right here
Let's say that you dislike your develop your users and you want to show them modals. I
Think models are a terrible thing. I think whoever invented them should be ashamed
And now I'm going to show you how to do them
This used to be a huge problem trying to render modals with react because it's really hard to get something
In front of other stuff. You either have to do unholy things with z-index or
You have to like find some way to like render something
First in your app and it becomes really hard to do right
We could probably like mess around and figure out how to do it someone
Context right, but I'm going to show you something way easier that they introduced to make this a much easier thing a much more common
I'll say more common but less user antagonistic way of using portals as let's say you had like
A side nav that contextually rendered stuff based on what was on the page
And so they're two separate things you can use a portal to say like all right render this into the side nav
If you're on the side nav, you can use a portal to say like, all right render this into the side nav
If you're on this page, right? That's actually a very cool use case for this
Yeah, a good example of this if you if you just want to visualize what i'm talking about is the azure docs so javascript
Azure functions. Let's just see if I can show you what i'm talking about
So let's say on this page you have the the nav here and then this is your react app here in the middle
You have these like additional resources here that you're training and like these change depending on what you're doing
Depending on which page you're on you can use a portal to say render into the additional resources these things when you're on this page
It allows you to render outside of your app, right? So that's kind of the use case. We're getting out here
so we're going to head into our
Uh index dot html and above root
We're going to put a modal
So
This time we're not going to put anything inside of modal because we don't want it to show anything
Unless there's something rendered into it, right? Okay. I want you to make a new file here. Just call it modal dot jsx
Do you ever watch the good place that that tv show
I feel like when I get up to the the pearly gates one of my crimes against humanity is showing so many people people how
to make modals
All right import use effect
And use ref so we'll talk about ref as well. That'll be kind of exciting from react
Import uh create portal
From react dash dom i'm just going to say this code is like
Like 90 directly from the react docs so you credit where credit is due
So maybe I can pass my sins onto them modal equals
We're talking about children as well. There's lots of fun kind of tidbits in here about react of kind of some more advanced use cases
All right, so this is kind of a weird one
But like what we have
One div that represents the root of our portal which is going to be that modal that we're going to grab, right?
We need to reference the same
div
Between renders right because this model is going to keep re-rendering because it's react right? That's how react works
So how do we make sure that we're always referring to the exact same?
Div we don't want to create a new div every single render. We want to refer to the same div between renders
How do we do that?
We don't
want to
Uh do a document dot get element id directly in the render. That's a slow api, right?
Anytime that you have to interact with the div direct or the the dom directly
You end up in like this kind of like slow code path and you don't want that
Enter refs. That's what we're going to do here. So we're going to say const
L ref l being element
Use ref and we're going to have it start as null
This is the default value the first time
and then we're going to say if
no
l ref dot current
Then l ref dot current equals document dot create element
Div
So a ref is a frozen object
We don't really use freeze too much. It's usually a library thing
But it only has one thing that you can modify on it, which is current
Why is it this way? Because then because the ref is an object
We can modify the values on it. It's always going to refer to the same thing, right? It's the pointer points at the same thing
So this current is going to be the same div so we're only going to create one div and we're going to reference the same div
every single render
Little strange, I know
But stick with me and it'll make a maybe a bit more sense here
Just keep in mind this l ref contains a div and it's the same div no matter how many times I run the render
Now our old friend use effect
Const modal root equals document dot get element by id
Modal
So that's going to be our modal root modal root dot append child
L ref dot current so now our created div is inserted into the dom. That's cool
And
Uh
Hold on we'll come back and do the return here in a second because I want to explain that more in depth
How many times we want to insert our div?
once empty array, right you got it
And then down here at the bottom, we're going to return
create portal
Of div
And we're going to render out children
And
Then we're going to do that with our l ref dot current
And then export
Default
modal so
create portal
What's cool about this is now we can render this anywhere inside of our app and it's like oh you don't want this actually directly here
You're trying to stick this over there, right?
So it's not going to render whatever you render as children there. It's going to stick in whatever you put in the portal
Let's talk about children for just a second
So if I have a div here and I have my h1 that's like uh
Right there right what is the children of this div
It's whatever is inside of it, right?
So it's the same thing with modal
What is the children of modal
It's whatever is inside of it right like whatever you put inside of it
Most of the stuff that we've been doing has been self-closing right where it's like pizza
Because it doesn't make any we're not trying to put anything inside of pizza, right?
So that's why all these have been the self-closing but modal we actually do want to like have arbitrary stuff inside of it
So that's what children is and children comes in via props. It's a it's a specifically
named
Props we destructured here, but this is normally called props, right?
If you did it that way you would just say
props dot children, right?
But instead we did destructuring because I don't know that
I I typically destructure
Because I like the the shorter names but that's up to you cool
We used an effect here because we want this to happen once we want it to be scheduled for after the initial render
That makes sense
Okay
As is so let's just that's probably a hint of what i'm about to talk to
um
This has a memory leak
Uh, why
Let's say I render and rerent and unrender this modal a thousand times
How many divs
Is modal root going to have inside of it?
a thousand
Nothing goes back and removes l ref dot current from this modal root, so it's just going to keep leaving behind divs
Right
So we have to go clean up after ourselves
right
So this is one of the weirdest
Apis for react in my opinion
But you return a function here
And you just you do all your cleanup here so modal root dot remove child
L ref dot current
That's our cleanup function
So whatever function you run or you return from your effect will be run once
After it gets unmounted and this will solve our memory leak